Caption: apologies
Caption: so uh without any further ado i'd like
Caption: to introduce you to dave
Caption: and dave is going to teach us all about
Caption: mobile app dev
Caption: i love mobile update so i'm really
Caption: looking forward to dave's talk
Caption: and without any further ado here's dave
Caption: thank you
Caption: so i'm here today to talk to you about
Caption: mobile app development specifically
Caption: cross-platform development
Caption: what that is and why it can be useful a
Caption: quick bit of housekeeping i won't be
Caption: taking any questions due to the length
Caption: of the talk but feel free to approach
Caption: either myself or any of my adapter
Caption: colleagues who are all milling about at
Caption: the front here
Caption: and we can answer any questions later on
Caption: i'd like to take a quick chance to thank
Caption: our sponsors without their support we
Caption: wouldn't all be here today
Caption: so i'd like to ask you the audience a
Caption: few quick questions before we start
Caption: could you raise your hands in the air if
Caption: you've got a mobile phone
Caption: md knock with our hand up could you keep
Caption: your hands up
Caption: if you've ever used an application on
Caption: that phone
Caption: everyone keep your hands up still last
Caption: one
Caption: if you've ever downloaded an app from an
Caption: app store
Caption: i think that's pretty much everyone
Caption: apps are part of everyday life now
Caption: whether it's photo editing
Caption: watching movies reading comic books
Caption: house hunting
Caption: vr or angry birds we all use them pretty
Caption: much every single day
Caption: they've also become vital to many
Caption: businesses unfortunately
Caption: they can be expensive in terms of cost
Caption: and time
Caption: that's where cross-platform technology
Caption: can come in
Caption: so i'm going to try and answer these
Caption: three questions today what is
Caption: cross-platform development
Caption: is it useful and which solution is for
Caption: me
Caption: but before i do that i'm going to take a
Caption: short trip back in time
Caption: prior to 2007 smartphones looked like
Caption: this
Caption: not very pretty they tended to they had
Caption: hardware keyboards some used styluses a
Caption: few had
Caption: touch screens but they were slow and
Caption: unresponsive
Caption: the sdks weren't open you couldn't get
Caption: your apps onto these phones and there
Caption: wasn't anything
Caption: even approaching an app store and then
Caption: january 2007
Caption: this happened steve jobs walked on stage
Caption: and announced the iphone
Caption: with its shiny shiny case its responsive
Caption: clear
Caption: colorful display and its clever
Caption: marketing the iphone caught the
Caption: imagination of both the public and
Caption: developers
Caption: sadly for developers at this point in
Caption: time there was no sdk for this phone
Caption: you couldn't get your apps onto it at
Caption: this point the only apps you
Caption: had on it were the basic ones safari
Caption: email contacts pretty boring stuff
Caption: apple are the trick up the sleeves
Caption: though they were already using their own
Caption: language
Caption: objective c to build applications for
Caption: their mac platform
Caption: and they had their own ide to develop
Caption: this xcode
Caption: in march 2008 they really released xcode
Caption: with the ios sdk built in suddenly you
Caption: could start making apps for this amazing
Caption: new device
Caption: at the same time they launched the app
Caption: store the first of its kind
Caption: this allowed you to deploy your apps
Caption: worldwide with minimal effort
Caption: but the close of 2009 there were already
Caption: 50 000 applications in the app store
Caption: today there are more than 2.2 million
Caption: ios applications
Caption: late 2008 these guys came along google
Caption: released android which is based on the
Caption: portable java language
Caption: at the same time they released their own
Caption: play store
Caption: very similar to the app store 2.6
Caption: million android apps
Caption: at the moment there were others such as
Caption: blackberry and the ill-fated windows
Caption: phone but they were crushed under the
Caption: might of apple and google
Caption: and these two have been battling out
Caption: ever since
Caption: moving forward in 2014 apple released
Caption: swift
Caption: which was designed to be a cleaner
Caption: quicker and more modern programming
Caption: language
Caption: it was backwards compatible with
Caption: objective c and at the same time they
Caption: released playgrounds which allowed you
Caption: to do
Caption: quick prototype development with swift
Caption: android still uses java to this day
Caption: however a lot of people have started
Caption: moving towards kotlin
Caption: kotlin was developed by the company
Caption: jetbrains and this was designed to be a
Caption: modern alternative to java with features
Caption: such as null safety
Caption: better generics and data classes
Caption: so this goes to where we are today two
Caption: platforms
Caption: both completely different clients often
Caption: ask us for a price for one platform
Caption: then it asks us for the price for the
Caption: second one and we say
Caption: it's the same as the first one and they
Caption: get sad faces
Caption: the reason for this is there's no
Caption: sharing between these platforms
Caption: completely different languages
Caption: completely different development
Caption: platforms
Caption: and two means of laying out the ux
Caption: that's before we actually get into the
Caption: platform specific differences such as
Caption: differences in navigation how they treat
Caption: push notifications sensors screen
Caption: resolutions the list goes on
Caption: companies were forced to hire two
Caption: different teams to develop their apps
Caption: or try and find the mythical creature of
Caption: the dev who's good at both
Caption: we started looking ways to count cut
Caption: this cost and devs
Caption: started looking for shortcuts
Caption: one of the first solutions to this
Caption: was apache cordova previously known as
Caption: phonegap this is based upon web
Caption: technologies such as html5 css and
Caption: javascript
Caption: familiar to anybody who's built a
Caption: website
Caption: this allows you to run on pretty much
Caption: any device that's got a
Caption: a web browser as web to native layer
Caption: which allows you to access things such
Caption: as accelerometer camera and local
Caption: storage
Caption: later on other platforms are built on
Caption: top of this such as ionic which gave you
Caption: access to
Caption: angular and react again very familiar to
Caption: anybody who's done web development
Caption: this makes this platform really good for
Caption: teams that have already
Caption: web development capabilities
Caption: because you're building a browser you
Caption: can use hot reloading you can make
Caption: changes to your application reload it
Caption: and instantly see your changes the
Caption: downside of that is that if you're
Caption: running a browser
Caption: you can't access the device um hardware
Caption: you have to run it on the actual device
Caption: to get that your performance isn't as
Caption: ever going to be as good as it is in
Caption: pure native because it's a web page
Caption: it also doesn't look and feel the same
Caption: as a web as a
Caption: natively rendered application
Caption: plus side of that your app will look
Caption: exactly the same on both platforms
Caption: that can be good if you get highly
Caption: stylized app if you want a native look
Caption: and feel
Caption: that's not so good
Caption: at adapter we use what we call parcel
Caption: solutions
Caption: these are a set of tools that we use to
Caption: do some of the heavy lifting up front
Caption: swagger is a format that allows server
Caption: developers to define the shape of their
Caption: api and how to communicate with that api
Caption: swagger code gen is an extension program
Caption: for that which allows you to take that
Caption: definition
Caption: and render it into a variety of
Caption: languages
Caption: including java which is what we use it
Caption: for this gives us
Caption: our android model and how to communicate
Caption: with the api
Caption: we then take and we translate it with jt
Caption: objective c
Caption: this takes java code in splits our
Caption: objective c code at the other end
Caption: we have both our platforms we also use
Caption: squid db
Caption: which is a create read update delete
Caption: database
Caption: it's a sqlite wrapper built by yahoo the
Caption: combination of these three
Caption: allows us to connect a web api download
Caption: the data perform business logic on it
Caption: and store it in a database and the
Caption: reverse process all across
Caption: platform in a nice clean way we still
Caption: have to build our ui and we still have
Caption: to do some of the business logic
Caption: and and the native site but it does a
Caption: lot of the hard work for us
Caption: one of the most popular frameworks at
Caption: the moment is react native it's a
Caption: javascript framework based on the
Caption: popular react
Caption: platform this was created by facebook
Caption: could previously been entirely web
Caption: focused and this was an attempt to catch
Caption: up with the native world
Caption: powers apps such as skype instagram and
Caption: ubereats
Caption: react native differs from cordova style
Caption: apps that instead of rendering to a
Caption: webview it uses the native apis to
Caption: render truly native front ends
Caption: let's take a look at how it does that
Caption: i'm not sure how clearly this will be
Caption: from the back but it doesn't matter
Caption: react runs javascript in the background
Caption: thread to create a dom
Caption: differences in this dom are pushed up to
Caption: the react native bridge
Caption: this is all this all happens in c plus
Caption: plus so it's fast
Caption: and efficient at the other side of the
Caption: bridge this is passed on to the native
Caption: layers so an objective c this is
Caption: this is in c and in java we use the
Caption: jdis to connect this allows us to
Caption: have native performance and native
Caption: controls
Caption: other features uses the open source yoga
Caption: layout engine which implements a flavor
Caption: of flexbox which again will be familiar
Caption: to a lot of people who have done web
Caption: development this is a lot simpler than
Caption: either ios or android layouts a lot
Caption: easier to use
Caption: elements are defined in with jsx which
Caption: allows us to
Caption: implement your layout inside your code
Caption: the other major benefit is
Caption: truly native controls you render an
Caption: alert
Caption: on android that look like an android one
Caption: and on ios it will look like an ios one
Caption: because it is
Caption: now in order to demonstrate how much of
Caption: a time-saving cross-platform development
Caption: can be
Caption: i built an app about my cat feature and
Caption: those are my cats
Caption: so this demonstrates four parts of most
Caption: modern apps
Caption: there's user interaction in the shape of
Caption: a button it connects to
Caption: the net the internet and hits a web api
Caption: which
Caption: catches the service pack this returns a
Caption: random
Caption: json file which contains a url to a cat
Caption: image
Caption: we download that we download the image
Caption: and we display it
Caption: so first i wrote it in swift which looks
Caption: a bit like this
Caption: 51 lines of code plus a storyboard for
Caption: the layout
Caption: not an awful lot then on android
Caption: 107 lines of code plus the xml layout
Caption: both these probably could have been
Caption: a bit shorter if you'd use certain
Caption: libraries or whatever but it was a quick
Caption: example
Caption: so running that looks like this android
Caption: and left
Caption: ios on the right i then
Caption: built the same thing in react native
Caption: that looks like this pretty much exactly
Caption: the same
Caption: the big difference is when we look at
Caption: the code
Caption: 52 lines of code this includes the style
Caption: which is all seen in the bottom section
Caption: the render section
Caption: one code base no duplication a single
Caption: language
Caption: javascript you're not swapping between
Caption: storyboards or using xml or any of that
Caption: it's
Caption: everything is in javascript over a 50
Caption: saving obviously that's not going to be
Caption: the case for every single application
Caption: but you're going to get some kind of
Caption: saving in that and you're not having to
Caption: go back and redo the same stuff over and
Caption: again
Caption: one of the new kids on the block is
Caption: flutter and we had a really good talk
Caption: about that earlier
Caption: and this was developed by google using
Caption: their own dart programming language
Caption: dart was designed through a simple fast
Caption: predictable native language flutter is
Caption: again slightly different
Caption: and it renders its own components to
Caption: a canvas this means it's very quick
Caption: and it's because it's doing its own
Caption: drawing it doesn't need the bridge that
Caption: react native uses
Caption: however these widgets are its own design
Caption: they make them look like the native ones
Caption: but they can there's a risk that can
Caption: fall behind
Caption: i saw an example just today whereas i uh
Caption: ios 13 control has changed and it
Caption: doesn't look right and flutter now
Caption: they're always going to be playing catch
Caption: up so again it's
Caption: possibly good for a highly stylized app
Caption: not necessarily great if you want pure
Caption: native and you want cutting edge
Caption: uses reactive active programming as with
Caption: react native
Caption: it's got a quick entry it's very easy to
Caption: use and very good
Caption: um startup it's a young community though
Caption: and the support for it possibly isn't as
Caption: good as some of the other platforms
Caption: and there's a lack of plug-in support
Caption: for it at the moment
Caption: but google are really pushing this and
Caption: they're going to push it forward
Caption: for the next their android replacement
Caption: possibly
Caption: last one progressive web apps there's
Caption: claims that these are the best of the
Caption: web and best of native apps
Caption: pwa is a website on steroids or that's
Caption: how it's been described
Caption: works on every browser every device it's
Caption: always up to date and it's instantly
Caption: available the same as a native app
Caption: it's not a framework it's a set of
Caption: technologies that have been bundled
Caption: together under this title
Caption: the main main concern to be a pwa is
Caption: that you pass google's lighthouse tests
Caption: this sets out a group of standards such
Caption: as being able to
Caption: it has to be on https it has to be quick
Caption: to download and respond
Caption: as to be able to respond if you don't
Caption: have javascript enabled
Caption: all of these concerns make it a pwa
Caption: it also has to be downloadable which
Caption: means it has a description that tells
Caption: the
Caption: browser how to download it package it
Caption: and put it onto your device
Caption: this means they bypass the app store you
Caption: simply go to the website and download it
Caption: pwas are bound by what you can do on the
Caption: web
Caption: so you can use push notification you can
Caption: use bluetooth you can access gps
Caption: you can't access certain other features
Caption: such as contacts nfc and
Caption: sms but this is changing all the time
Caption: previously you couldn't do payments but
Caption: that's coming very soon
Caption: again low data requirements and one of
Caption: the other things lacking at the moment
Caption: is cross-platform
Caption: login so you can't use things such as
Caption: twitter or facebook logins
Caption: so back to my original questions what is
Caption: cross-platform development
Caption: cross-platform development is a set of
Caption: tools or frameworks which reduce the
Caption: overhead of writing from multiple
Caption: platforms
Caption: is it useful well it can be if it
Caption: delivers what you're looking for
Caption: and provides a saving if you don't get
Caption: the performance you don't get what
Caption: you're looking
Caption: for it but then it's probably not worth
Caption: it but
Caption: for an awful lot of standard type apps
Caption: it probably is a good thing to do if
Caption: you're going to
Caption: deploy to both platforms which solution
Caption: is for me
Caption: well we've gone through a bunch of them
Caption: if you want cutting edge and you want
Caption: the best performance
Caption: pure native for still still a great
Caption: choice
Caption: specifically if you're trying to use
Caption: newer technologies such as vr
Caption: wearables the support just isn't quite
Caption: there for some of the other platforms
Caption: and they're always going to be a step
Caption: behind
Caption: parcel solutions i talked about if
Caption: you're already building native apps then
Caption: these can help do some of the heavy
Caption: lifting for you and leave you to
Caption: concentrate on the front end
Caption: if you've got a web-based team already
Caption: then one of the web-based frameworks
Caption: such
Caption: as flutter sorry react native or cordova
Caption: might be your answer
Caption: if you want a leading edge and you're
Caption: looking to the future then flutter might
Caption: be the choice
Caption: but you run those risks there are others
Caption: xamarin which is great if you've got a
Caption: c-sharp.net team
Caption: it's got great performance as well
Caption: because it compiles down to native code
Caption: if you want a quick and easy solution
Caption: you've already got a website and pwas
Caption: might be your answer but that's never
Caption: going to be a native it's an
Caption: app it's never going to look like a
Caption: native app
Caption: so the answer is really in figuring out
Caption: what's important to you and matching
Caption: with this
Caption: solution that fits your specific use
Caption: case
Caption: that's not to say that the
Caption: cross-platform development is always the
Caption: answer
Caption: and give an example of where it can be
Caption: difficult we had a
Caption: project where we had to render two maps
Caption: on a single screen
Caption: was working perfectly in ios on android
Caption: the second screen wasn't rendering
Caption: correctly either wouldn't appear or the
Caption: map points wouldn't appear on it
Caption: we ended up having to delve down to the
Caption: native code
Caption: tweak that submit a pro request to
Caption: react native um
Caption: source code um if you don't have
Caption: those skills you wouldn't be able to do
Caption: that if you're relying on as a web
Caption: developer as your solution to get
Caption: on a native platform then you can hit
Caption: those kind of issues
Caption: as i mentioned i won't be taking any
Caption: questions however um
Caption: i will be putting this up as a blog post
Caption: shortly on our website and
Caption: as i say i'll be here for the rest of
Caption: the day and you can push myself or any
Caption: of my colleagues
Caption: thank you